# pluot

Implement once, pluot everywhere (across languages, regardless of whether static or interactive).
Create declarative static and interactive plots using WGPU and Rust/WASM.



## How it works

Plotting functions are implemented in Rust using [WGPU](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu).
These Rust plotting functions are only concerned with producing a "static" plot output, given their input parameters and data.

- To render plots in the web browser, the Rust code is compiled to WebAssembly (WASM).
  - JavaScript wrapper code handles interactivity and data-loader registration.
  - The Rust code calls pre-registered data-loading functions when it needs to retrieve (subsets of) data (via Zarr).
- To render static plots in a Python context, Rust bindings generated by PyO3/maturin can be used.
  - Simple Python wrapper functions convert the returned pixel buffers into NumPy arrays or PNG/JPG/etc images.
  - To render interactive plots in Python, AnyWidget can be used (Not yet implemented)

## Principles

The frontend/client should never "touch" the data.
In other words, it should never execute a `for` loop over the data (for rendering purposes).
The frontend/client does, however, need to register data-loading functions that will be called by the Rust code to retrieve data.


The frontend will specify visual properties and data-related properties and expressions, for example colormaps, viewState (zoom/pan), data filtering expressions via parameters.
The data filtering operations themselves will always be performed in Rust.
For example, given a viewState, the Rust code may load certain chunks of data. Given a data filtering expression, it may then filter that data. Finally, it will perform the render pass and return the arraybuffer (which the JS code will render to a Canvas).


The Rust code should only be concerned with rendering a single plot, and should not care whether the caller is intending to use the result in a static or interactive context.
It should be fast enough for this not to matter.

The WASM and JS bundle sizes should be relatively small.

## Non-goals

- Heavy customization of plots via the client/JS API. For example, defining shader fragments from JS.
- Multiple views per render function call, or coordinated multiple views. These should be achieved via the parent library, for example, by wrapping with [use-coordination](https://github.com/keller-mark/use-coordination) or your favorite state management library.
- WebGL fallbacks. Instead, we can be patient and wait until WebGPU availability improves.

## Why not just use JS+WebGPU directly?

This would couple the plotting code to JS, which we do not want for a library that should be usable in multiple languages, including without a JS runtime.
It would also make CPU data processing operations more challenging.



## Development

### Build for WASM

```sh
# Install nightly version of wasm-bindgen CLI
# Reference: https://github.com/wasm-bindgen/wasm-bindgen/issues/4446#issuecomment-3172624621
cargo install --git https://github.com/rustwasm/wasm-bindgen --rev b766ac3e206a8efab2c7cf91923cd502b2bc77a5 wasm-bindgen-cli


wasm-pack build --target web -- --features wasm
```

Test in browser:

```sh
http-server --cors="*" -p 3005 .
```

Open to http://localhost:3005/www/

### Test in Headless Browsers with `wasm-pack test`

```
wasm-pack test --headless --firefox -- --features wasm
```

### Publish to NPM with `wasm-pack publish`

```
wasm-pack publish
```

### Build for Python

```sh
uv sync --extra dev
```

Build:

```sh
uv run maturin develop --features python
```

Run tests:

```sh
uv run pytest
```

Use in REPL:

```sh
uv run python -m asyncio
>>> from pluot import render_py
>>> await render_py(width=100, height=100, plotId="test", plotType="triangle", storeName="test")
```

Try in Jupyter notebook:

```sh
uv run jupyter lab --notebook-dir python-notebooks
```

### Build for plain Rust

```sh
cargo build
```

Run tests:

```sh
cargo test --features test_plain_rust
```

## Rust learning resources
- Rust for Everyone: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R0dP-QR5wQo
- Fork of rust book: https://rust-book.cs.brown.edu/ch04-01-what-is-ownership.html
- Learnxinyminutes: https://learnxinyminutes.com/rust/
- A half hour to learn Rust: https://fasterthanli.me/articles/a-half-hour-to-learn-rust
