# Developer docs

## Repository organization

This repository is organized as a monorepo.

### Rust

The repo contains a cargo workspace, in order to support both development of the `pluot` core crate and the example crates in `./examples` which depend on `pluot` and have their own additional dependencies.

The core Rust/WGPU plotting code is located in the `pluot_core/src` directory.
Rust-associated files also include:

- `Cargo.toml` (workspace-level)
- `pluot_core/Cargo.toml`
- `rust-toolchain.toml`
- `.cargo`
- `pluot_core/tests`: Plain Rust unit tests
- `target` (generated by cargo)
- `Cargo.lock` (generated by cargo)

### JavaScript

The repository contains JavaScript bindings in the form of an NPM package (containing a React component that loads the WASM bundle) and web apps for a demo site and documentation site.
The NPM packages are managed by a PNPM workspace.


JavaScript code is located in the `bindings-js` directory.
JavaScript-associated files also include:

- `package.json`
- `pnpm-workspace.yaml`
- `tsconfig.json`
- `vitest.config.js`
- `vitest.setup.js`
- `node_modules` (generated by pnpm)
- `pluot_core/pkg` (generated by wasm-pack)
- `pnpm-lock.yaml` (generated by pnpm)
- `webgpu-playground`: Plain HTML files for quickly checking concepts and syntax in WebGPU shader code.

### Python

The repository contains Python bindings in the form of a Python package.
Python code is located in the `bindings-python` directory.
Python-associated files also include:

- `pyproject.toml`
- `bindings-python/notebooks`: Testing the Python bindings via Jupyter/Marimo notebooks
- `data`: Code to download/generate data for testing
- `.venv` (generated by uv)
- `uv.lock` (generated by uv)

## Principles

The Rust code should only be concerned with rendering a single plot, and should not care (or as minimally as possible) whether the caller is intending to use the result in a static or interactive context.
It should be fast enough for this not to matter.


The WASM and JS bundle sizes should be relatively small, as we want to prioritize web-based usage from the outset.


The frontend/client should never "touch" the data.
In other words, it should never execute a `for` loop over the data (for rendering purposes).
The frontend/client does, however, need to register data-loading functions that will be called by the Rust code to retrieve data.


The frontend will specify visual properties and data-related properties and expressions, for example colormaps, viewState (zoom/pan), data filtering expressions via parameters.
The data filtering operations themselves will always be performed in Rust.
<!--For example, given a viewState, the Rust code may load certain chunks of data. Given a data filtering expression, it may then filter that data. Finally, it will perform the render pass and return the arraybuffer (which the JS code will render to a Canvas).-->


## Challenges

- Keeping the bundle size small.
  - Prevents using certain Rust dependencies, such as for text rendering, requiring new minimal implementations.
  - Prevents using WebGL fallbacks, as this also increases the bundle size significantly. However, we could explore progressively loading a larger bundle in this situation.
- WebGPU not yet available in all contexts.
  - Safari and Firefox on macOS versions prior to Tahoe
  - CI machines that lack a GPU
- Compilation for web targets with Rust dependencies that have C subdependencies that assume C libraries like `stdlib.h` and `string.h`.
  - Prevents using certain Zarr (de)compression algorithms that are implemented in C
- Challenges using multi-threaded and concurrenct Rust programs in WASM contexts.
  - See [comments](https://github.com/zarrs/zarrs/issues/242#issuecomment-3236982849)
- Need to port low-level plotting logic (e.g., from D3).
- Supporting both raster and vector formats. In some cases, plot rendering logic may need to be implemented twice, once for each type of output.
- Efficient rendering while providing high-level APIs.
- Caching intermediate values to improve performance in the interactive case.
- Rendering something before all data has been loaded.
- Extensibility, enabling implementation of new plot types outside the pluot crate.



## Rust learning resources
- Rust for Everyone: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R0dP-QR5wQo
- Fork of rust book: https://rust-book.cs.brown.edu/ch04-01-what-is-ownership.html
- Learnxinyminutes: https://learnxinyminutes.com/rust/
- A half hour to learn Rust: https://fasterthanli.me/articles/a-half-hour-to-learn-rust
